okay thank you everybody this is the
town of Andover Board of Finance special
meeting uh discuss the bud the school um
excuse me the budget uh on the agenda
tonight is primarily to review the uh
the school budget um I just want to make
a couple of comments here particularly
for the members or the public who may be
joining us just in case you're not aware
the uh main role in the board of Finance
with respect to the school budget is
just to um review it we do not make
changes to it for the charter the it is
the board of education's responsibility
to review and adjust the budget as they
see fit and the budget that they pass
will then be the budget that is
presented to the town in the town
meeting um so the board of finance will
does not actually make any changes to it
but it is uh something that we review
and ask questions that that are relevant
to the to the budget
um so hopefully some of you had the
opportunity already to review some of
the meetings and the presentations uh
that the board of AD had uh had and just
informational sessions about the budget
uh prior to now but if not we do have
the superintendent with us and she will
go over the budget and uh then we'll
just have some General open discussion
okay so we'll go ahead and call the
meeting to order so and recite the
Pledge of Allegiance I pledge allegiance
to flag United States of America and to
the Republic stands
Nation indivisible Liberty
Justice okay thank you uh the next item
is uh public speak we give an
opportunity to the public uh to share
any of their comments or questions in
advance Eric do you want to go around
quite a few people on this a few people
there sure uh first up on my screen Jer
and and
cre hi
everyone um I just want to say of course
I'm here to this evening to support the
Boe budget for the 2025 2026 school year
however I would like to tell you from my
personal experience just today why I'm
so supportive of the endover elementary
school budget I was asked to be one of
the judges for The in invention
convention today I with other judges
spent over two hours visiting with and
part the participating
students um most of them were fourth
graders I was astounded by the creative
thinking of these students theyi
identified a problem in their world and
then proceeded to invent a solution to
the problem and create a
prototype
um of the and that was the their invent
ion and with the Prototype they were
truly incredible you had to see it our
students were friendly then they were
able to articulate the
process and their their entire thinking
that went into this project the other
students from the other grades who came
in to see the projects were kind and
respectful I couldn't be more impressed
I was extremely proud and and of our
Andover Elementary School our school is
the crown Jew of this town our students
are second to
none I thank all of our staff our
teachers principal tler Parker and
superintendent Val brunau for teaching
and caring for all of our children each
and every day I am requesting that the
board of Finance members of the
community along with the board of
Finance support our Boe budget for the
upcoming year thank
you okay and
kmine I nothing I'm just listening okay
Jay
Tuttle uh evening I was just popping
into uh if uh the board of Finance
members had any questions on uh the uh
information I
provided the other day from the last
meeting thanks CH
okay uh Linda fish I'll excuse me I'll
set okay Celeste
Willard hi uh good evening everyone I'm
just here in support of the Boe budget
thank you for your
time okay and Caitlyn
McIntosh hi I'm just here to support the
Board of Ed budget that our board passed
um unanimously um just we're asking for
the town for their support as well um as
we continue to support our school and
the incredible awesome things that
they're doing thank
you okay Mark that appears to be the
members of the public I see you Chris
Hera that's the assistant finance
officer sorry
okay got it okay well that being said
thank you everybody for your input um I
guess the first thing I would do if uh
if valer you give just a just a little
bit of uh time here does anybody have
any specific questions for Jay on the
information this cheat that he sent that
we could I don't want to uh you know tie
up the the discussion right now with
that but if anybody has any specific
questions and then we could cut him
loose if we if if there aren't any more
Joanne yeah I just wanted to thank Jay
and thank you Val for letting him just
go quickly in front of you um I wanted
to thank you for all the details that
you sent to us after the meeting last
week I know I had said in in the meeting
that I would follow up with some
questions but before I did that you sent
those spreadsheets that you keep with
the extreme detail so we were able to
see line by line um all of the
information so any of the questions that
I had were kind of answered in the
details that you sent so thank you for
that that's my input thanks okay Louise
you had your hand up too yeah I just I
actually am echoing the same thing that
Joanne said um lot of information there
Jay you did a great job and um we thank
you for
that else agreed excellent yeah
appreciate all that detail it really
really helps a
lot
ditto okay
great okay Joan you're on mute oh I have
one followup question just real simple
you had said last week and I think it
was specified in the spreadsheet how the
um the payments the lease payments you
know in your Public Works equipment I
wasn't prepared for this but I think
it's the Public Works
equipment um
fund we were we were going to take some
out of that other fund right and it was
showed it it was okay you you were gonna
yeah it would it would be coming from
the tar account thank you for this for
this fiscal Year's
payments okay come this month in June
yeah and the amount of funding that's in
that fund
currently and what is asked for next
year will cover one payment for each and
then we talked about the other situation
okay yeah yeah thank you that's it all
right that's all I had just uh just a
quick pop in and appreciate you let me
stop by okay thanks Jay appreciate the
of the
time okay okay so that being said uh you
turn it over to the superintendent um
who will uh give a presentation on the
uh budget ER theol to share screen yet
Eric yeah we'll have to activate
it you should be able to share now okay
thanks see um hang on one second
I need to grab it
up
um let's see if it worked did it work
looks good okay so first before we look
at the actual uh numbers there I'll do a
quick I won't do every slide but I'll do
a quick reminder of kind of along the
way what we've presented um myself to
the board and then to seniors in town um
so that you kind of know um the the the
quick narrative there this year sorry
I'm sorry could you put it in full
screen mode yeah sure I can see the
slides coming have a lot more detail and
small print oh yeah my my old eyes will
not be able to read it okay thank you
okay so thank you y no problem um so the
big things this year that that we really
needed to consider number one first and
foremost is enrollment so I'm going to
show you a couple of slides on
enrollment and this is really what we've
kind of you know echoed meeting after
meeting after meeting is um I've been
here five years and um I'm very grateful
that in the last five years we've gone
up by 70 kids I'm sure that the whole
town as a whole has seen that enrollment
effect um I know we've mentioned this
before but we have houses selling like
hot cakes uh some people in in the
school it's self I know I I I keep using
Rosemary Crandle her her son was looking
for a house for some time and finally
after 10 bids on the 11th bid they
managed to secure one and so I do know
that um homes are going for a lot more
which in the long run will benefit us
all an Andover because that'll be more
of a revenue coming in on higher priced
houses uh than what they were before so
enrollment overall is is a big great uh
thing for the town this year we also
negotiated a teachers contract and a
noner contract um which it's a driver
but uh we will have three years now of
knowing exactly what those costs will be
and those increases so that in the long
run again is going to be a positive for
us um special education costs
unfortunately those drive it year to
year but you never can plan uh for down
the road in the future because those are
always the um unanticipated at times um
for an elementary school anyways um the
variable there is when we have
three-year-olds to 11 year olds uh
that's going to be the prime time that
you have new referrals and and new
services that are required um you know
children aren't often identified as
special education after they leave
Elementary School it happens but their
services will be adjusted but the new
referrals occur in a small um I mean in
a a a younger
setting um and they're mandates so there
isn't even anything that we can do there
uh they're mandated through the PPT
process process um medical benefit
increases again I'm sure you saw that
with uh the townside budget as well we
are in a Consortium as you guys know and
so uh every year uh we had hoped to keep
this under control um and we've been
pretty lucky and the past five years
that I've been here so this year we were
looking at um somewhere between 7 and %
um and then the other adjustments that
we make as a school is the other things
that we know do we know people coming
off the insurance do we know people
coming on the insurance um we are going
to welcome five Andover babies this year
uh to our staff so uh we do have to look
then were they on an individual um
medical insurance plan before and now we
know it'll be a family plan next year uh
so we do have to look at those things um
and then Tech and mandated changes to
the curriculum that's kind of important
because in the olden days I'm dating
myself here but in the olden days it was
books how much do you guys need for
books and that really just isn't the
case anymore with curriculum uh we look
at What technological needs what um uh
sign on um you know for accounts for
students um we look at new curriculum
coming in that's piloted in what goes
along with it as supplemental material
sometimes it's books but not always so
those are the things that we do have to
look at that drive um our budget
increases this one right here is our
enrollment summary this is current
and so um you will see that we have kept
the number of classes in my recent um
five years as low as possible uh in
terms of um the number of classes I know
back when we had three 100 plus kids you
know there were three of every class all
the way across um I've really tried in
the past five years to um not increase
the number of classes until it gets to a
point when it's no longer appropriate I
either number-wise or by student need
and so as you can see four five and six
are very large classes and they're very
large classes because we were able to
kind of hold that off for the taxpayer
as long as we could without having it
interfere with um student and student
achievement we are starting to see that
obviously we're at the 27 27 and 22 Mark
there um that's just not possible and if
you look at grade three you will see
that um grade three is already over
they've got um 36 kids they couldn't
possibly by law go into one fourth grade
class that number has to be below the 30
Mark there so um these were all things
that we consider now one of the things I
I I also made sure to put into um every
time I've presented this is the misnomer
um I know that historically um there are
people that sometimes assume that um we
I've always had small class CL and that
um you know we always had the same
number of classes so I I purposely
wanted to show the community and now you
guys tonight that if we went back to
2010 when the student enrollment was 334
students at that time there were 22
classrooms um and if you look at that
trajectory from 2010 to 2025 our current
you can see that the number of
classrooms did go down as the student
enrollment went down
and in 2018 there were at that point
198 students there were 14 classes and
there were three prek
then the following year um the number
was 205 for the 1920 school year again
with 14 classes I take over during that
time period so the the time period where
it says closed in March down to the end
um that would be uh what our enrollment
numbers were since I've been there um
and the decisions to Hold Steady reduce
or try to increase class sizes then from
there would be something that I I really
looked at um we stopped originally with
the three prek classes um after covid
and we had gone down to two prek classes
at that time we just didn't have the
number of of students that um we needed
to have uh to really warrant thre um but
if you notice the Grant funded I mean
the general funded classes are the
number of other classrooms and you'll
notice that we held 14 there for a while
and in 2022 we did go down to 12 at that
time with the student need at 200 kids
with the student need as well as the
class size um for two years we had a
split we didn't ask the taxpayer to open
an additional second grade class and
additional third grade class and we've
held that steady um all the way through
until
2024 we have 11 classes plus the four
preschools there with 242 kids
so it's it's really tight now it's
really tight and when we look for next
year we do have to address as I
mentioned on the slide before we do have
to address the fact that we now have too
many kids in third grade here for the
one class and very large fourth grade
here
uh for the other class however if you
notice the 22 will come out of um our
population here that's grade six they'll
go to RAM and we are not asking for a
second sixth grade class this upcoming
year that would be the following year
for a variety of reasons adding three
new teachers adding three new classes to
that Upper Grade um we do think if we
have the right fit for the
interventionists for the special
education teachers that we currently
have we can manage that one more year so
this is our current enrollment these are
the number of classes and this is all
online um uh I know you guys have seen
I'll go back to that one the salaries
the salaries for um the teachers came in
at at fair and reasonable um 2 to 3% um
raises with the two uh contracts that we
negotiated uh with an increase to their
portion of the insurance as
well very fair
contracts special education costs again
this varies from year to year um I talk
about this all the time uh with you guys
uh every single year this is something
that I think that the um the average
public sometimes wrestles with like why
can't we reduce something um just real
quick here uh before we get into the
numbers uh real quick when we come up
with this number it's not something that
is just a a generic number we don't say
oh well we spent you know $70,000 last
year on speech so we'll spend $70,000
this year not necessarily we go through
very systematically and we go through
every plan for every single one of our
special education students that require
that service and we say by their plan
how many hours do they need and then we
figure out based on the number of direct
service hours for let's just say speech
we then figure figure out um how many
indirect service hours there are do they
have in addition to ppts that they are
going to have to sit in on um do they
have students on consult and we really
systematically come up with how many
hours we need of speech service and then
that's what we have um speech for
example uh this year we started off the
year with a speech pathologist uh that
came to us that we share with another
District um and we each had that Speech
Pathology olist as a05 meaning half the
time so they did two days in Andover two
days in the other district and then that
last day every other week they uh
alternated um midye they said this
schedule's kind of tight uh definitely
kind of tight and um we did the best
that we could with the consult hours um
with making sure that uh we could meet
the needs as long as possible and just
this month we from the other District
had to take that other day so now we are
at 3 days a week because of the
increased number of service hours so we
do hold off as long as possible um we
don't kind of build in any extra hours
with those service providers um but um
from year to year it varies it varies on
the needs of the
students
so my little there we go um benefits
we've gone through this before and I
know um you guys are are very aware that
we are an insurance Consortium so uh
it's a very successful Insurance
Consortium it is the town of Andover
bard of Ed town of Hein bard of Ed town
of marbor Board of Ed RAM and ahm uh we
meet monthly um we are uh it's it's a
great uh Consortium not only is it a
successful Consortium but um we have
voting rights then um so all decisions
that are made are made by the whole
Consortium as a whole the only one with
two votes is Ram because of the large
number of um
uh clients that they have you know uh
that they cover uh staff that they cover
um let's
see as I mentioned uh with curriculum
and Technology um the changes are with
the change of curriculum um it's not new
devices it's new things for the devices
is like
licenses um with the increased number of
students would be the increased number
of licenses because most of the
children's um technological licenses for
software programs that they utilize in
in math and science they are charged by
the uh the number of students that we
have so they give us a rate and they say
this is the rate per student and if we
have to add more uh students then
there's an increase there it's minimally
affected um but nonetheless it is
there okay so I am going
to stop sharing this one for now not
done yet though Eric I'm going to be
switching to another screen here if you
don't mind um
whoops and I am going to pop up the
worksheet
for the budget that I know that you guys
have
already seen um sorry Eric I I'm I'm
trying to figure out how to close out
one and move into another so just bear
with me for one second
here um
do we know how to do
this let's
see
okay think I got it
now all right so now I can share that
screen again when I share that screen we
should now
see there we go thanks for being patient
and again I will try to make this full
screen
okay how's that is that better very good
thank you you're welcome um I take the
glasses off for closeup bill but you
know I'm with you the
opposite so okay so if you went through
um the the budget you know you will see
uh lots of areas where we were able to
keep things the same and again focusing
on only those areas that we say are
drivers um would show the increases so
clearly you can see that this whole
section here on the
top um this whole
section I can't see you guys so somebody
have to yell out if you have a question
um this whole section on the top would
be um the section that is our um
salaries and the increase here would be
to the salary increases for our
certified staff
um through the contract increases but it
would also be um that new 3.1 FTE that
we are looking to add um to accommodate
the needs of the additional
classrooms so and wait Valerie Val can
we ask questions as you go through this
line by
line are you guys all okay with that
Mark and everybody or do you want to
just see the whole thing first and then
ask
questions I think it makes sense I mean
did you say yeah did you say we could
ask questions as we go or should we wait
until you're what would you prefer I
don't care it's probably better to do it
now especially if she's accessing
multiple files it might be tricky to go
back and so it probably makes sense just
you know I think as long as we're not
you know hitting you know 500 questions
but I mean even if we do questions we
can ask them yeah
good so the first line the teacher
salaries what on that line what is
included in in that line so like
currently there's 11 teachers in the
current budget and you're hoping there's
classrooms but Liz in there's 11
classrooms but in the teachers union um
is is everybody else you you got to
remember we have a gym teacher we have
an art teacher we have music teacher
it's everybody who's in the teacher
contract Library yeah well no library
has one separate line so I was just
going to say Bill unless you see it as a
separate line so you see special ed
teachers have their own line there and
that's more for bookkeeping purposes
because we have state reports that we
have to fill out where we have to
examine our sped costs um speech is a
separate line I don't know why uh it
works to our advantage now but I think
that was done years ago because it's my
estimation that the speech teacher
wasn't always a union contracted
position it was probably at one time
that it went back and forth maybe it was
in the union and then maybe it was a
contracted position the library salary
and then instructional tech salary um
these are just all it's all part of the
teachers union there and on those top
five lines um but under teachers it
would be all the specials areas teachers
as well everybody who teaches within the
building it's not just the classroom
teachers what you won't find there
though that is Union but you won't find
in there is um the uh for teachers that
teach um preschool because as you know
that that budget's not is not in here
it's it's self-sufficient so those four
teachers are not in
there thank you you're welcome now
that's a good point I was gonna have
that question too just to kind of
understand it and I think I did too I
knew you had you know the special ed
teachers are we allowed to ask is there
are we allowed to ask numbers of
you know I knew the teachers the
certified would be the classroom and
then thank you for pointing out like the
PE and music or whatever you have as
right being in that Union the
instructional Tech is that your library
not your library media specialist right
you have another teacher on staff that
does technical things technology yes
that's always been the title um I love
to say she's the guru of everything um
but that is Chistina Frasier wases in
that line I thought so yeah yes so that
was her um technical title for the
teachers contract Union um which morphed
into not only does she do that obviously
she's been doing um 10 other jobs during
the course of the time that she's been
there um for as well but that line is
where she is now remember um to your
point Joanne and to Liz that because
this is the budget for next year that
we've you know proposed and then the
board's voted on under that teachers
recommended the 1.5 there that would
include the new two new classrooms that
we're looking at so the additional
fourth and fifth so yeah so those 11
that we used to have would then be um
two more 13 so Valerie I have a
question yes Lou um special ed teachers
how many are included in that just
curious um so that one includes two
full-time special ed teachers uh that we
have uh downstairs um so that's two
full-time ones and then um we do have a
teacher support from one sorry if the
dog barks I apologize um so yeah so so
that would be like two and a half um
staff members okay thank you so under
instructional assistance sped and then
the um substitute teacher regular
substitute teacher special I will tell
that these lines have been on the next
ones they've been a little skewed um in
in the past year because we've had uh a
difficult time permanently filling um a
couple of special education I mean um a
couple of par educator positions and so
um for part of the year um and that's
why you see 27,000 in there for the
teachers and then under special ed
teachers you see two and then the next
line you see uh 3,000 in there for subas
and people keep saying me well what's
the difference where does this go it's a
little bit skewed because sometimes we
are short uh temporarily I'll give you
without revealing too much about a
specific student if a student moves in
let's say and um it is known that they
require some assistance but we haven't
gone through the whole process of
assigning let's say a pair of
professional to them that could fall
under um um
subia for that particular moment in time
until there's a permanent one and then
they would move to a different line um
so if there's any questions on those I'm
slightly vager on those because I don't
want to identify a student but um those
numbers right there um substitute
teacher regular uh and then um
substitute teacher special ed it doesn't
necessarily mean um that I I would like
you I think I'm saying I'd like you to
look at the 29 ,000 as a whole there
instead of saying why is $2,000 allotted
solely to a special education teacher
and not to somebody else those two lines
right there combined for 29 um are
substitute teachers for the teachers
union
okay um if we look further down you'll
notice that most of it's exactly the
same there really aren't any major
changes um on the rest of this page we
did mention that there is um certainly
going to be a change with um some of
their benefits uh not substantial
changes on this particular page you'll
notice the negative um 75% there with
custodial again it's not that large of a
number but I would like to point out
kind of to give a little Kudos our
custodians work really hard um and they
have made sure that um especially in the
summer that they do a better time with
planning who's on vacation when so that
they can work out the whole summer
schedule and in the past two years
they've been very good at preserving
that line and so um I give kudos to them
on that we were just making the schedule
this week as to who's here which weeks
in the summer that we know of already so
that they can make sure that there is
always a custodian there um so I just
wanted to take a second to give them
cudas on that
one okay Val just a quick question sorry
to interrupt but the pension line
what who does that include which
employees does that include so the
pension line um that's in there um that
if Terry were on here she would tell you
exactly which ones um we don't pay
pension to teachers I didn't te yeah
they pay their own trb so I'm glad that
up yeah we do just like the town side we
do pay the murf the mer yeah yes that
would be the only pensions that are paid
on our side is and mainly to
administrators is that no no no um like
I'm I'm in teachers retirement okay
thank
you um it is to anybody that um is not
uh you know uh in the education teaching
C uh Union or in the admin Union so it
would be par professionals um anybody in
the noner union the nursse is in that
Union PA of professionals are in that
Union the custodians are in that Union
um the Rosemary's in that Union um
Diane's not Rosemary is but um yeah that
it's no that makes sense I I know that
some districts do have you know
retirement benefits for the
instructional assistants or par
professionals some don't and Y so that
thank you and that's a good point I
didn't yeah and I didn't look up in the
contract to see so thank you for telling
me what that one was just curious thing
and it's the same thing as the town side
so you know whatever percentage is paid
it's paid universally so they are part
of murf the the par that you know yes
and I won't go on
a it's it's a huge thing I mean I know
some districts have Define contribution
and we've had our other Bo you know
Board of Finance discussions about murf
and the so not not the time or place for
it here but no that that makes a
difference that's why that's a high
number because murf is a high percentage
and that's been in their contract since
right right and to your point Joan not
every District does have it my other
District not um but it is here and and
so yeah it's been here for for quite
some time okay thank you okay so then on
the second page um which my pages that
are in front of me oh there we go okay
um on the second page you'll see again
almost everything there starting from
the um retirement on down you will see
that we don't have significant increases
with the exception of the benefits and
you'll see here it's
8.75 over the benefits line that we
currently have um that is because
although we're looking for an 8%
increase um in the premiums um we would
have to have adjusted this for the new
positions and any other changes that we
know were occurring um along the way as
I said if we know already that someone's
going to have a family plan who didn't
before um sometimes it works to our
advantage that lots of people's kids
came off when they turned like 26 not
the case this year because we're very
lucky that we do have um a younger staff
um and so that's where that number comes
from you'll notice as you go a little
bit further down um and I'm going to try
to make sure that I'm not skipping any
sections here there's a couple of
changes uh minor changes I don't want
anyone to think we are pulling Services
when you get down to psych Services
you'll see that there's a small decrease
um right here that doesn't mean we're
reducing psych Services um but you'll
notice that our actual expenditures here
were so low because of the general fund
because that had been part of a grant
and so for 2 years the majority of um
what we were paying for the psychologist
had been coming out of a grant
so um that's the difference there went
from Grant funded uh in part to not
Grant funded from the 24 actuals to the
25 adopted
um let's
see um and if you look down there is an
increase I don't want to miss it on here
because it's you're looking at the non-h
highlighted version because when I
showed you a highlighted version it just
didn't um close well uh to be looking at
something highlighted in yellow uh let's
see again Technical Services um we see
some increases too again it's not the
purchase of new devices it is either um
something that is curriculum rate
related or it's because we just have a a
a new number of students um we are not
upgrading I'm not buying all new
computers or anything like that the only
time that we do purchase new ones if was
if we don't have enough um I know this
year there was a purchase of about five
new Chromebooks because we were short in
Supply but other than that it's not a
purchase of new um
Chromebooks uh can I ask you a question
um what is where is it where did it go
oh on lunch program no no
no where did it
go right here uh 20,000 program yeah
what is that okay so because it's
extremely expensive for a small District
to um have a full program on its own we
are one of those districts and we have
for a long time that we fall under the
umbrella of another District basically
we share a food service program with
centry
and the employees that's what I was
wondering the employees that work in our
kitchen are in our Union there are
employees um but to have an oversight
person her name is actually Beth Pratt
who oversees the program uh for centry
centry then um bookkeep I guess you
could say to I call them buckets um so
Beth oversees basically two kitchens she
oversees centries and then ours um
bookkeeping wise they do the paperwork
for the federal government they do the
state paperwork they take care of all of
that for us and they do our you know
Revenue in and revenue out um
expenditures it's not Revenue
expenditures out and they keep our
bucket and so they charge to us at the
end of uh the quarter the end of the
year they will charge to us what our our
expenses are that we couldn't cover with
what was in that bucket now I'll go back
just real quick here the reason why it
said actual expenditures for 24
$33
um so just in case that question getting
I know so what happened was during covid
and after covid um for quite a period of
time the government had been doing very
high reimbursements so where a free and
reduced lunch reimbursement might have
been $3 for lunch and a $110 for
breakfast the reimbursements that they
were reimbursing to districts um were
much higher and so we're very lucky
centry is a great partner for us to have
as they were reimbursing they were
actually putting into our bucket all
those additional Revenue sources
instead of saying well you know we have
oversight so we're just going to keep it
for ourselves which a lot of other
places would have done and so what
happened was for almost two years there
for the 23 to the 24 year um what
happened was we wound up with Surplus
funding in there the only catch to that
Surplus funding is they don't return
that funding to us they have kind of a
laundry list of things we can do with it
to better the kitchen and so if at the
end of the year they say Val there's
$10,000 in your bucket you can't carry
it forward but this is a list of things
you can do with it that's what we did in
23 and that's what we did in 24 so we
didn't get a bill in 23 they said quite
the opposite here's the extra money
that's there um these are your options
for what you want to spend it on and um
we actually have in the past I'll say 24
months because I don't know exactly when
the purchase was made but we were able
to replace the stove which probably we
still had a little bit more life on it
but we had the money to do that that we
might not have in another year um and
they were able to replace two other
appliances during that time period so we
have a beautiful kitchen we got a
dishwasher because we knew that the law
was going to change and that no longer
were we going to be able to use the um
uh the foam uh you know uh serving uh
plates for the kids the trays we were
going to have to switch to the washable
ones and of of course with only one
person full-time in the kitchen and one
part-time one um we knew that was going
to be a difficulty so we purchased um
the the dishwasher so we've been very
lucky with them 20,000 is what our
marker is because based on our Trend
data going back pre-co that would be the
most that that year would cost us and if
you looked at when it cost us preco it
was around that money so the 20 is in
there because we don't know what's going
to happen this year in terms of Revenue
we don't know how many kids are going to
buy lunch and how many kids are not this
year and how much we're going to have
left in the end and so um if in fact we
wind up having um that bucket empty the
maximum it would cost us would be 20,000
so that's the long version there but um
it's been absolutely a life saer for us
to be able to partner with Cent trate um
because it does save us quite a bit of
money any other questions on this
page okay we'll move on um so we've had
some increases and I know you guys as
the board of Finance have really worked
with us uh this last year and a half to
really talk about moving forward some of
our big projects but you know we very
regularly um you know take care of all
of our repairs and maintenance um issues
within the building um we have our our
contracts that you know for example um
our custodian with some of our
contractors um we make sure that all of
the uh Heating and uh air conditioning
um filters are changed that's contracts
that we have on a regular basis we make
sure that everything is taken care of
with uh the facilities and the operation
on a regular basis so that we don't have
unexpected big things we know that
happens but um everything is in these
lines here um um and so the increase to
some of the service contracts that we do
have coupled with some of the things
that have just gone up in um cost for us
because uh there's more of them um more
rooms that are utilized uh the increase
there is about
14% um we have for example a USA
mechanical we have contract with USA
mechanical and they come and take care
of all of our HVAC needs um and they
work with our head custodian who again
kudos to Scotty's wonderful um they do
our inspections and they make sure that
um anything that needs to be replaced is
done in a timely fashion um you know
small things small repairs and
operations we're not talking about big
Capital here talking about regular
maintenance and operation there um so
that would be one of the reasons why
that line this year is a little bit
higher if you look our actual
expenditures for 24 were closer to that
75 they were 74 716 so um it was uh
necessary for us knowing that those are
our increased costs to increase that to
the
75 excuse me um again transportation is
a contract it's a contract that is a
regional contract for us when I mov down
to the middle
there
nice I'm just curious if any of that in
that last section has anything to do
with the bathroom repairs that need to
be done nope I'll get to that in the end
Louise that was
um the bathroom repairs that we know we
need um are as a result of an incident
that occurred where there was a
difficulty with the urinal and then from
there when the plum came we realized
that there was something a little bit
bigger um it wasn't something that um
wasn't picked up in a routine uh check
it's just an incident that occurred um
you know unexpectedly
with that said um I know you're going to
get to that um any possibility of
insurance covering some of that because
of the situation they did Cover um Surf
Pro did Cover about
$112,000 I mean a kerma did Cover about
$122,000 worth of cleanup at that
resulted from that so that's not in here
so that's a great question and yes they
did cover that they reimbursed So Pro
coming in to clean up for that so that's
not in here from last year and anything
after that as well as far as repairing
the
damage um no because it was it was
repaired so now moving forward it's a
capital issue to make sure it doesn't
happen again which is why we close those
bathrooms because it wasn't just a
matter of well if you fix the toilet
you'll be fine it was a matter of us
saying H if we keep at it with the with
that plumbing system there we're going
to have even more problems so since we
have other bathrooms let's not use these
okay so thank you so yes but I will get
to the uh bathroom in just a just a
couple minutes um so in transportation
as I said the contract that gets
renegotiated it gets renegotiated for
Hein and over marbor and Ram uh we do
share that um contract it was a fair and
reasonable increase um you know it's
tough nowadays any of you who work in in
either education or any other fields
that deal with
transporting um with bus companies
sometimes even trying to get a bus
company we have a few in the state
obviously but to get them to even issue
Us in the RFP process uh was difficult
um because they need drivers and so uh
ultimately in the end and I thank RAM
and Hein because they really took the
lead on that last year um we managed to
um come out a lot better off than had we
gone with another company um but to
remain with dco um and we do know what
our premium will be then for year to
year so that 137 that's there um is is
based on the the contract that we
negotiated this past year with them and
our costs special ed
Transportation that's a tough one always
um special when when when you have a
surprise uh need to transport in terms
of special education um that is
something that adds up very quickly the
average average cost to transport a
special education student on let's say a
deco bus or an Easton bus it can range
from $190 to $300 a day Reas and that's
the the reasonable rate um so um we're
pretty lucky that we don't have um a
problem right now because we are
leasing uh the town um senior vehicle um
so we have a contract with Eric over at
the town and um we pay a certain amount
of money to utilize that vehicle for our
handicap need as well as our enrichment
need for a student that goes up to RAM
and so now can I ask a question on that
just
piggybacking um what you said are you
allowed to and I agree with you this is
this is a high cost thing if you need it
and you have to go student by student
are you allowed to I know in bigger
towns we have without giving up too much
information but students that have the
need for special ed Transportation like
you say Ad door to door or something we
may have like five students on a minib
buus is that the way that it's handled
and right okay that's what I figure we
absolutely had that ability to do that
um we have shared Transportation with
other towns before if we had a student
that was outplaced and the other Town
had a student that also attended that
outplacement absolutely we do that it's
not always um an option uh the bus
company oftentimes tells us when they
can and can't you know meet our need um
and so so are you and I I apologize for
interrupting so are you talking about
above and beyond just the regular
transport to and from school like you
said for the enrichment or addition well
so again we'll talk in the hypothetical
Joanne you know why of course of course
so um a handicaps student for example
needs a handicapped vehicle so they
can't ride the regular school right um
there becomes times when we have
students that either temporarily or
permanently also require special
transportation and that all under here
so if for whatever whatever reason
there's a student with a sped need and
they can't ride um the regular full
school bus um we have to provide
alternative
transportation sometimes we can do it
like we do with the student that goes to
Ram um um with utilizing the senior
Transportation but if we weren't able to
we then would have to contract with
another vehicle we'd have to call dco or
Easton we'd have to potentially call
another town and see if we could um you
know mirror a ride someplace so
unfortunately those we don't always know
now for next school
year but um these are the services that
we do know right now that 36 U built
into that is excuse built into that 36
for next year is what we pay the
town thank you yeah I just I didn't know
the different modes and if we're done
with Transportation I just had a
question understanding if you could just
tell us because I know you've talked to
it before Val I just forgot the
instructional techn the the line above
the instructional technology repair and
maintenance and then the admin
technology repair and maintenance that's
an outside contractor sort of like an it
yeah so the the 40,000 that's East con
um so what we have is we have um Easton
that does all of our um Tech and with
that I will say they also um provide two
half days a week where they come on site
for that same amount of money so um it's
not just they're answering things
remotely um if there's an issue within
the building they are there on site on a
regular schedule and um I'm not sure
which days they are you'd have to ask
Taylor that but um you know it's it's
it's a godsent um because having that
person on a regular basis able to come
and and and get things up and running we
then are not ever without our service
either so uh that's been phenomenal and
they've been helpful I mean I know that
they've they've helped the town on on a
couple of things too uh so yes that is
thank you for pointing that out that is
a contract that we have contracted
service no thank you I just want to
understand and and thinking about in the
past I think there have been for those
that don't there you might have had a
person in the building but when you have
a person it also brings additional costs
like for benefits and different things
that go along with having a person so
when you look at the figure this
probably like you said works out well
right I mean it's one thing to have like
a castina that can brainstorm other
things but I can tell you that the
average cost of having a person let's
say 5 days a week that's just your Tech
person and that's all they do your
tickets and everything you're going to
pay that person
$100,000 correct right yeah I mean and
so she Christina Works along with Easton
clearly does work she does and and the
good thing is I will say this about um
our Tech person and I'm sure every town
is different you know on the success
rate with their Tech person um through
Easton but ours is phenomenal and um
castina can email or call or reach out
even when it's not a day that they are
in the building and say oh my goodness
like we have this issue and very
oftentimes they're able to solve it for
her right then and there or they'll stop
by if they're dealing with another
school on a different day and they're
like you know what we're going to be in
the area tomorrow we'll come take care
of it tomorrow you don't have to wait
till Thursday so um so yeah it's it's
really been instrumental and that c has
stayed fairly steady um there's no price
gouging for us on on that one
so thank you so yep you're welcome okay
so wait one more question on that sorry
one more um so the difference
between the instructional technology and
the admin technology what's the
difference instructional technology
repair and maintenance versus admin
technology repair and
maintenance so it's everything that's
not the guy and eastcom that's in the
40,000 contract would be everything else
that's in the 10 so if there's something
that we need let's say the Easton guy
comes and says you know you um need a
router put into this classroom or you
need and I'm making this up because I'm
not all that techsavvy but we won't tell
anybody about that um a a router or
something else that would go in the line
above it so it the instructional
technology repair and maintenance
does not include the person does not
include the regular contract that we
have with Eon so if there's anything
else that needs to be done it goes in
there so that's okay the other one is
the person and the one above is right
things for instance over and above what
it is we contract with yes okay the
regular stuff goes under the uh 2580
line and then everything else would go
in the 22309 yeah
so okay um anything else on this page oh
on the bottom um magnet schools in the
outplacement Special Ed I can't change
the title of that line that's on the
bottom but I will tell you that um this
year for example some of that
outplacement special Edline was actually
services that were provided in placement
for a student um hypothetically speaking
uh there are some students at times that
um go to programs that are half day
outside and they're covered someplace
else uh through insurance or through
another program and then they come to us
for the other half day that would fall
under that line um magnet schools on the
other hand are different magnet schools
are not special education magnet schools
are any of the charter magnet schools in
the state that an Andover resident
decides to attend by law they have that
right and if they do by law we have to
pay for that the average tuition um is
about $5,000
per student for those schools I can tell
you that there are a couple of residents
in the town of Andover that we've never
had the privilege of meeting but their
tuition is in this they moved into the
district they attend that school when we
prove residency that they live there we
then get the
bill so unfortunately that's the way it
works so I can't tell you that I have
the privilege of knowing the children
that we're paying that1 18,000 for for
the magnet schools but I can tell you
that that's the law if an Andover
resident attends a magnet school we have
to pay for it and um it's our budget
that it gets put in because we are the
k6 school so um after sixth grade then
if that child is still attending one of
those schools it would be in Ram's
budget so you will see in Ram's budget
that there's a same thing there's a line
item for Charter and magnet schools for
anybody that attends a charter magnet
school instead of ram that is um a
resident of Andover
okay and I know lots of people say to me
that's not fair but it's the
law Valerie um could you maybe talk a
little bit about the go back down a
little bit the library line that looks
like a really big percentage
jump the library the library the instru
library software instructional
technology licenses fees it's a 30
almost
32%
jump um well if you look it is less than
$1,000 from our actual 24
expenditures so I'm looking at I'm
looking at current here so well so that
is because as I said you know
oftentimes um if something was not in
the general fund it was covered from a
grant and it has to move back it's in
there some of this would be related to
um you see under there the licenses and
fees things that we didn't used to have
to pay for um for the curriculum the new
curriculum would now be in there um so
you'll see last year when we piloted a
program uh we piloted a new reading
curriculum as well as a new math
curriculum so when we piloted the new
reading curriculum and remember the
state did mandate us to choose um new
reading curricula um if that wasn't
required the first year it wouldn't have
been in there if it was required D then
that Taylor um opt and we have bookworms
to um include that now this year it
would be in there so those licenses and
fees are back to what they were in 24
with a new program we now have book
works so um if you want a list of
curricula I absolutely um will get a
list for you list Taylor would be the
one that would Supply that for me so I
can get that for you I'll write it down
um um and all of the um resources and
expenses that are associated with that
resources and
exp yep no
problem
okay yeah there we go
okay um on this page there isn't any
increases to anything we've got 0% on
the top there when we move down you'll
notice that um when we get to this
section that has
um supplies I've always hated the fact
that they do separate it out like you
would at a middle or a high school buy
area because sometimes they overlap um
but what I like about this page and this
is why I didn't give you the full um
seven pages of the uh supplies there is
is that this one doesn't separate
everything by grade um on this page it's
it's pretty much the same um when we had
grant opportunities in the past few
years um and we had uh supplies we
utilize that most of the classrooms to
be quite honest with you um with the
change in curricula um really have
gotten away from a whole lot of the um
you know lined paper that they would use
in the lower grades um and things of
that nature so uh I'm confident and I've
talked to Taylor I've talked to uh the
uh teachers union I'm confident that
where we are at this point with these
supplies will get us through so that's
why we don't have any major increases
here
um let's
see I'm line this page up with my next
one the 610 okay on this one here you'll
notice uh when we get down to
electricity um um we do have a little
bit of an increase in electricity here
based on our Trends from the last 12
months I'm hoping that maybe in 12 more
months we'll be having a different
conversation if those numbers go down
with
solar uh the heating oil uh we do show a
a negative increase an oxymoron there
but a negative increase for heating oil
not because we plan on using less
heating oil but because we locked in the
rate um and our old rate was 297 and the
new rate for this year is 259 moving
forward to the 25 26 school year so um
that is um absolutely a plus for us
there um other than that on this section
we we don't have uh any other uh changes
or
increases and then that brings us to the
bottom line there we get to the bottom
line
um I know that there's
you know quite a percentage increase on
here this year again if you looked at
exactly what the percentage increase you
know uh
represents that figure there is uh
381 and when you look at the 381,000 the
contractual obligations for um the
contracts for theer and the noner uh
make up uh about 56,000
of the
381 222 would be for the increase of
positions the classroom teachers and the
um point tws for the special that 3.1
FTE about
$75,000 of it would be um to the
benefits
line and about $21,000 to licenses and
technology and those other small
increases so in the end sure it seems
like a pretty difficult number because
we're doing everything in one year that
probably should have been done over the
course of a couple of years but we put
it off because we held those classes
bigger um any other year I think people
would have said 27's too much we've got
to cut that down that's too big what we
wound up with was um people having faith
and understanding that we were still
going to meet the needs of the kids um
while we could and we just we just can't
anymore um I would also at this point
then and I know I said we go back to the
bathrooms uh kind of just look at a
couple other numbers for us in the
overall I know you say well our job as a
board of finances to look at the whole
picture um I do know that this year
educationally speaking we will wind up
with um and we're lucky for this we will
wind up with
um um I don't want use the word refund
but a surplus back to the town from Ram
of of 100,000 because our Levy is low uh
and that was their Surplus I do know
that in looking at their budget we'll be
lucky enough that um we will wind up uh
saving 34,000 there on educational
dollars so when we're looking at what
this unfortunately whole big picture
looks like um I know that that that will
uh play a factor uh for the town's
people when they're looking at a 381
increase to be able to say well we do
have
$134,000 that we will save with ram um I
do also know that on the town side um
last year and then going into this year
uh they are recommending another 100,000
into the ases capital account um but I
can tell you that um this year um we
don't need to put that in there we don't
need to put that in there and
respectfully I know this is your job to
do the town budget but um we we could
take that out we could take that out
because the audit uh is almost finalized
now and as the audits finalized um I did
meet with the auditor last week on the
school side and the conversation that I
initiated with Robert almost two years
ago now Robert if you could believe it
almost two years has passed since we had
the original conversation where um as he
was getting his child ready to march in
the Memorial Day Parade I said listen
I'd love to have a conversation with the
board of Finance because I happen to
know with the grants that we have with
some changes that are coming over the
next couple of years you know we're
going to have Surplus money and I would
love to be able to work on putting that
aside for some of the future capital
projects and thankfully Robert was
listening and said I think that's a good
idea let's talk about this and he came
to you guys and then I know um he worked
with you guys and with um Shannon um and
then our other board members and last
and now Caitlyn um to really work on
getting that account going I am very
grateful that you guys um were able to
get that account going um last year we
didn't have as much but that's because a
fair number of the grants well it's
actually two years ago because remember
they just finished the audit for last
year but I know that we had some grants
that ran two years so the Surplus we had
year one was a little bit less but the
Surplus than year two was higher and I
can tell you that we did finish the
audit and Robert as I expected almost
two years ago um the Surplus that we are
going to be after our board meeting you
know uh Caitlyn will have a letter put
together but asking for you guys to put
in there is going to be about
358,000
and so um thankfully I don't have to
sweat it out everything worked out
exactly Robert as we thought it was
going to work out um and so I wish that
I could say well let's just use that 358
to offset the 381 we need but I know it
doesn't work that way that's just not
how we get to legally do that um but the
358 um that winds up going in that
account um Louise to your point is the
reason why we don't have to come to you
guys this year and say in addition to
needing staff we're going to need more
money for Capital because we're going to
be able to kind of help fund that um for
the town with that Surplus and so I know
you guys will appreciate that I know the
taxpayer will appreciate that and then
Ram's money should offset the um the
townside budget so I think actually even
though these numbers look really large I
think when all said and done and you
guys have to do the job of looking at
you know extra revenue and surpluses
versus what we're asking for I think
we're going to be okay um and and
everything will work out and if the
taxpayers is able to see that they'll
see that you know this was a couple of
years project on part of of all three of
the financial entities um uh the budgets
but I think it'll work out I think the
bathrooms the elevator and the driveway
were what I know our our our last year's
chair who's on here now Celeste she
really was able to let you guys know
when you asked at that Tri meeting what
is it you need I know she was clear she
said we need the bathrooms we need the
elevator we need the driveway and we
know that that account only has 212 in
it right now but there will be 358 going
into there and so I do believe that it's
not necessary for us this year to worry
about asking for more
when we have that Surplus there more for
Capital what we really need is to focus
on increasing the staff that we have to
match up with our increased enrollment
and if we can do that this year I think
we're going to be in a great shape um so
I have appreciated I mean I know I just
called out Robert andan there for
working with us but I mean the whole
board as a whole because you all voted
on that for
us um and I think that we are in a good
place and it just looks scary to see 381
without saying but we're getting 358 to
put back into the capital account and
now we can take 100 out of the towns
side where they were going to set it
aside for that Capital account so um so
I'm optimistic I'm optimistic that once
that picture is explained to people they
really will understand that it's a a
good thing um in terms of the place
we're at right now I just want to say
thank you for for offering that 100,000
you know being honest with what's coming
back and you know presenting to us
tonight I I know Mark will take over but
I mean I think that's a big deal that
you said that we could you know we do
have a tough budget in ahead of us like
you said the overall picture so you
coming forward and and being honest
saying that you know you have this
Surplus coming back and then saying that
you you know that we should could remove
it you're you're actually helping us
with that so thank you for
that well because I mean let's face it
we're all on the same team here Jo no
exactly no I just want to acknowledge
that not many people do that you know
you're being honest you're telling us
where you're adding but you're saying
hey this year we have this coming back
we have these projects we have a yeah so
I appreciate it I I like when people you
know we know it's this year we don't
know what'll happen any other year but I
app well and the thing is is if if we're
not going to spend that all in this next
fiscal year then let's wait and do you
know what I mean like don't you don't
want to take money now that you're like
well we might need this we don't know
thank you this is what yeah that's
that's what we do I mean and what US
volunteers spend time doing analyzing
and looking and asking questions that's
all so you're right if it if it really
isn't needed this year in that
particular line that's going to help us
you know in our in our task so thank
you okay any further questions go ahead
Rob yeah so Val um I wanted to ask you I
wanted to kind of circle back to the
original graphic you had about the the
class sizes just because I think this is
a topic that'll come up when we go to
pass this budget um you know you you
pointed out and I agree with you uh the
the high numbers four five6 right I mean
my daughter's in six 22 isn't too too
bad but 27 that's that's a big class
size you know especially for us but you
know pretty clearly on the graphic there
you've also got three classes that are
projected out where you're having like
11 kids a class
and I personally strongly suspect but I
want to hear you talk about it a little
bit that that has to do not just with
well that's the right number but also
it's about specific students and their
needs and things like that I presume you
guys have gone through that I haven't
watched every presentation so I do
apologize but I think that's something
that is a likely flash point and so I
kind of wanted to talk about it a bit
and you're on mute by the
way yes I I just wanted to reach over
and grab the numbers in front of me so
you're absolutely right Robert um that
it does depend on the students it
depends on the grade level as well
because we all know like hey when we
went to college I don't know about you
but I had like 200 people in some of my
classes I mean you know it's I went to
Trinity
no I went to Southern for a while so um
so it depends it really does and I do
hope that the you know the general
public here in the town of
Andover um has recognized in the 5 years
I've been here I am not that person
that's pushed to keep eight nine 10 kids
in a class I don't think that's even
healthy to say you know we expect every
class to be 10 or 11 kids um in a
regular classroom setting um you know
it's it's what's right for those kids
and if you guys remember some of you
were on the board but you were all you
know living in town one of the things
that I had pushed post Co and thankfully
got support was if you remember at that
time we did three first grades and I
know we got pushed back because at the
time they were small but I knew looking
at those particular students they hadn't
all attended preschool and some of them
missed a huge chunk of kindergarten and
so the task at hand in making them
readers was going to be impossible if
those teachers did not have smaller
classes and so I fought for it because I
knew it was the right right thing at
that time but then I wasn't fighting
with the town's people I had
disagreements with some teachers when I
said let's do a two three split instead
of opening a extra second and an extra
third boy I wasn't popular the first
time we had that meeting but I was able
to show them that it was appropriate for
their children that they weren't going
to be forced into that class and as we
moved along and I believe actually
celeste's daughter was in that class but
um I believe as we moved along people
realized okay that was the right thing
to do at the time and we didn't put a
burden on opening a class for the sake
of opening a class just because of the
numbers you're absolutely right Robert I
could very easily have said well we also
need the extra sixth grade class next
year because that number is going to be
high as well but I do know the needs of
those students and we do know um the
expertise of the staff and we can
prolong that one more year so I didn't
want to ask for it just simply because
that number next year is going to be
high I do know
that there are for math for example
there are students from that class that
already go to small group with another
uh faculty member so for me to say well
technically there's 27 kids in there
sure there are going to be 27 kids in
that room next year but not for every
academic so it is able to be done for
one more year so um and yes you're right
and and and we take into consideration
the needs of the regular education
students the needs of the special
education students um what other
resources we have available in assisting
those students who need interventions
and things and so yep next year you can
probably expect a sixth grade request
but not this year so just to just to get
back to it so it's like first second
third if memory servs from your chart
are the classes where you get the real
small class sizes as opposed to and
there a dramatic difference right
between the two
and you know obviously it's the consider
judgment you need those small class
sizes that at the at the early end but I
mean it is something people are going to
bring up you know when you have 10 or 11
kids in a class you know could those be
combined would it in fact be harmful to
the kids education you because obviously
the main driver here as you walked us
through is your Staffing changes uh that
is the big difference everything pretty
much flows from that the the the
salaries the benefits the whole night so
you know I guess if somebody would to
say like well couldn't third grade be
one class or next year couldn't second
grade be one class the counterargument
to that
is you know what there's just too much
need in you know in that student group
that you just don't feel comfortable
doing that well so if we go backwards on
the enrollment uh chart there um so
right now um if we have two third grade
classes currently okay there's 36 kids
in the that by law I can't make one cl
oh no I'm not talking about that one I'm
talking about know so if I go before
that if I go to grade two grade two
there are 24 kids um there's
absolutely right there's absolutely no
way with those 24 kids that those 24
kids could even be in one classroom with
the needs um there there just isn't um
that would be an
impossibility um if you looked at if you
looked at um first grade again uh with
the 21 students that are in that first
grade impossibility
um and in kindergarten and and it's
impossible and just just be clear it's
this isn't you know I'm not trying to be
hostile or anything I'm just trying to
get dig into it the when you have 21
kids you know there's a lot of people
who are gon be like well that's not that
crazy number so it's is it really just
that there's a lot of services for that
group that that they need like a lot of
you know there's a fair bit of addition
work I can't I can't give you certain
information on the kids I don't I'm not
asking for detail you know on a
particular student that's that' be a
violation but um I can tell you that I
would need to
um increase significantly the number of
par professionals that I have currently
in our building if those class sizes got
bigger um so it's kind it' be like one
step forward one step back kind of
situation where you'd have to staff up
anyway because as you guys know too
because I think Joanne mentioned it when
she asked about the retirement um many
years ago I know that one of the
strategies that not necessarily Andover
but certain school districts utilized
was um when a class size got big they
threw a par professional in there and a
par profession we know that the rate of
pay at that time you know was somewhere
let's say around $20,000 and they said
oh however as Joanne pointed out we have
to pay um murf on that particular
individual not that they don't deserve
it they do so I don't want anybody get
mad at me there but now when you're
looking at the overall cost of adding
that
um non-certified teacher you have to
consider
$25,000 plus the uh contribution to the
pension and if it is a a young person
who may have a family for insurance
benefits the average cost of to the
district of uring a family is
30,000 so um you could potentially be
looking at the exact same cost as a
brand new teacher so a lot of districts
realized that years ago and went wait a
minute what are we doing here because
then you also had someone that wasn't a
certified teacher so that practice I
think in general and I don't just mean
to you know our little corner of the
state here that practice by most
districts doesn't really occur anymore
you don't see regular education par
professionals being put into a room just
because the class size is large so
instead most of your par professionals
now are um hired solely for special educ
a purposes but they're they're
specifically there for particular
students particular needs or and
sometimes we are able to with students
um that require need let's say half the
day instead of a full day a par
professional would be assigned to
multiple children um and I will tell you
that we have um more than 50% of the
Paras in our building that work with
multiple children so we do not have a
lot of like what they used to call
onetoone Paras we just don't so they are
yeah I'm sorry I I phrase that badly
what I meant was you don't have a pair
that's just kind of there because
there's X number of kids in a classroom
they're there for it may be two or three
but it's for specific needs and when I
say two or three it's written into um a
document so we we don't have any pairs
that work with students simply because
the teacher says I need help here um
that we don't have any of that is
development plan stuff yeah okay they're
all in either 504 plan or an IEP for
sure for sure
okay which is not something you get to
hand wave away no but I will tell you um
you know I was a special ed director
before um and I can tell you um in my my
other district for example um they
actually a couple years ago would have
said wow she cuts a lot of Paras because
Robert I am not a believer that adding
extra adults in a room for just for the
sake of the numbers of kids does anybody
any good so you know I I will put them
in the room if they're needed just like
I will will make the class size smaller
if it's needed um if it's not then the
class size stays larger um so you know
I'm pretty Frugal when it comes to that
stuff um we have great teachers too
which helps um so you know there are not
every teacher would have been able to do
what the teachers did this year in
fourth and fifth and sixth grade with
those large class sizes and they've
managed very well they are very skilled
teachers okay well that was basically I
just wanted to touch on that just
because I see that
as a looming issue you know when we go
to public hearing and what have
you it's a thing and and I I my answer
would always be if we could make one
class like I have over the past five
years I absolutely would Robert without
a problem I don't have a problem with
that okay thank you anybody have any
further questions for Valerie
okay hearing none thank you for Valerie
for your presentation I thought it was
uh well paced and detailed and uh told
us what we needed to know uh of course
there'll always be more questions
eventually but appreciate your time and
that of the board members and other
supporters um do anybody have any final
comments we don't actually have a uh
another public speak session but if
anybody from the board would like to add
anything or clarify ify anything uh to
give you the opportunity to do now do so
now just unmute and raise your hand
Bill's on mute I you look like you were
talking man I was I was just saying
thank you Valerie excellent job and uh
no I'm all set mark thank you yeah thank
you Val for the presentation appreciate
it and answering the questions as we
went
along thanks well okay I we're we're
good Mark just here I just truly want to
thank the relationship that we have been
able to have in the last year and a half
with the board of Finance um it's really
truly been you know a a great thing that
we're all able to have these open
conversations uh about the finances it's
really been helpful absolutely so I I
truly thank you guys for that great
thank you thanks thank you all
right so I guess we'll uh turn it over
to the uh other board members so we have
a couple of options we could uh adjourn
the meeting we can go on to General
discussion of our uh budget as it stands
now um those are really the two things
we can do um the we can't go on to
anything that's not budget related
because it as a special meeting it needs
to be part of the agenda uh posted ahead
of time yeah Rob my only thought my only
thing I think we might want to consider
doing tonight is to talk about that
Capital fund thing that Val brought up
um you know I think it makes total sense
to Zer that out in the light of 358
coming in I think that just makes a lot
of sense and helps relieve some of the
pressure on this budget but you know I
don't know if people want to mle that
some more and kick it to the next
meeting or something I'm I would be
comfortable talking about that and
voting on that tonight but up to you
guys we certainly can it's part of the
budget relevance so we you know we
certainly talk about it that was not a
bad time to do it does anybody feel like
it's a bad idea I guess is my my
question I was I'll
I I was I was just thinking that you
know with this budget two Mill increase
that we were looking at that we were
going to have to at least take a whack
at that $100,000 not eliminate it but
hearing what val did tonight it sounds
as if there's no harm at all in doing
that so I think I would support what Rob
said uh this going be a tough budget to
pass this year and that's that's a gift
so yeah yeah we really
appr word but yeah we'll take it
I mean I like the idea putting the money
away too because you know there some big
ticket items coming up there but like
she said the $358,000 that's coming back
is coming back so it's be a tough year
and I think we have to take advantage of
that so Mark can I share my screen real
quick go right
ahead can we hear from the other board
members first two Mark just before Eric
you know does his part in it me other
board of Finance members anybody have
anything else they L I had yeah I was
just going to say I know that you you
had I had a question for Eric that I'll
say for the end but I know he's probably
going to show us some projections with
that or something but I just wanted all
of us to have our our input but I I
really appreciate that she brought it
Forward because a lot of different
people might not you know different
departments they always want to get
their money so I set it out loud to her
so I really appreciate it and um she did
make point of just so that board knows I
jotted down these uh the ram budget was
1,
38379 over last year that's what their
budget was over so like like Val had
told us they are keeping
25,000 they're returning you know to the
towns the money so it you know it is a
win that will get a little bit back
there as well so taking out this AES
Capital fund because they have their
Surplus coming back is a good idea in my
opinion
too and I know er's going to present to
us but I just wanted to make sure that
we had our board members say something
first if we could I have thoughts but
I'm gonna I know I'm gonna be the fly in
the ointment
um my feeling
is I wanted more detail I wanted more
detail from the board to really
see breakdowns um in the budget like for
instance the AES custom detail report
would have been nice we didn't we didn't
really get to see that um and and I know
that the board voted for a capital fund
which I think is important because
there's stuff that comes up and it has
to be done but I don't think we agreed
that all the Surplus would always go to
that fund and it seems to me if they've
got a a surplus of over $300,000
to me that
shows that the budget
was higher than it than what they
needed
so I'm just concerned with just going
along with a an 8%
increase given that it it just makes me
concerned
about I don't know it concerns me that
budget concerns me can I just interject
one thing I think sometimes with respect
to as budgeting it's a little tricky
because we don't always know what grants
we're going to get and they'll get you
know Val get a Wrangle Grant mid year
and that'll result in savings that they
couldn't Bank
on so I think and this I bet you this
happens at the ram level too which is
why they got these massive surpluses
sometimes I think that's sometimes what
happens and so it's a little hard to
budget um real close to the Bone like
we' like I I agree with you in in kind
of the abstract that if you if you were
to consistently come in with hundreds of
thousands Surplus then you maybe you're
budgeting there there's too much in the
budget and you need to pair it down we
certainly look at things like that on
the town side so um that would be my
thought on that uh as to the two not the
2% apologies the capital fund I think in
the
end uh we kind of decided to to kind of
roll with the idea that this is all
being done in good faith and so I
think it
is more or less okay from my perspective
for them to to dump that money in there
especially because we know we have like
three major projects coming but that's
my take and and you know opinions differ
that's
fine y Kim has a question Y no I just I
just want to say
I I'm great with you know going forward
with the $100,000 but I also agree with
Liz I they have a surplus this year but
it seems like almost every year they
have a fairly good amount of money left
in their budget and I am very
uncomfortable with an over eight%
ask I think that's
high Kaitlyn has a
question or Caitlyn has her hand
up and she's on mute okay yeah Caitlyn
you're on mute yeah go ahead yeah sorry
I wasn't sure if I was allowed to speak
or not um yeah but um in terms of the
agreement that we signed with you guys
that both our boards signed that that
pretty much does say at least the one
that Joanne wrote um that we're allowed
to ask you guys to put our access into
that Capital account at least that was
my understanding from the final draft
that we passed um and and in regards to
you know uh money that's that's left
over at the end of a budget year 100%
like most of the time that's related to
Grants um so like Valerie spoke about
the bookworms um uh thing that was
piloted and the fact that we didn't pay
for it in one year because it was a
pilot program and now we will pay for it
so things like that and and other things
that are covered by grants are not stuff
that's known at the beginning of a
school year and it's not things they can
Bank on it's not like most of a school
budget is you know money going into
different Capital funds to fund future
projects it's money that you need to use
in that particular year so um but we we
really appreciate everything that you
guys um have done for us um in the past
couple of years so thank you thanks
thanks Caitlyn I just want to piggyback
on what everyone's saying I mean
truthfully looking at it and and we the
the people that look at it a lot but it
will go to the town and the town is
going to have things to say and like Rob
brought up and then he asked the good
questions about enrollment because that
does stick out um we tried to ask as
many questions as we could this is a
year where this increas is is is Big um
we did the other thing in good faith we
did talk about that Capital you know the
AES Capital fund or the rules and
regulations going with that or what we
would be okay with because we wanted to
make sure at least if there was a
surplus that it wouldn't be overspent
when there were projects waiting if you
follow what I'm saying so I agree
there's there's a lot of different ways
to look at this my take is I am happy
that since we have a bunch of projects
on the horizon now and there will be a
surplus that the taxpayers already spent
that we can put it back in that fund and
hopefully the money's there then again
we'll be decreasing our overall budget
you know with the hopefully if we take
action on that tonight but I mean
everyone is not wrong and that's why I
like opening it up to everybody's
opinions Mark wasn't here the very first
meeting Mark where we all decided
overall we thought the budget numbers
were high you know little by little
they've trickled away with you know Ram
taking a little bit away and now if we
can decrease this by the 100,000
we'll see where we were um yeah I don't
want to go on and on but
um it's it is you know it's a big number
to look at and I don't think people
would want to see it year after year
that's for sure I hope yeah and Mark if
and you explain too that we are here
just to listen to it and not take action
action is taken when it goes forward to
the town meeting and things like that we
I think have to be the reporters for the
town we all those of us that wanted to
ask plenty of questions to get detail um
yeah that's but I I have a question for
Eric um at the end so I'll I'll step
away for now Mark
thanks all right Eric did you want to
uh tell us what you were going to show
us here and follow up there sure
so um if you take Val suggestion and
change
the capital fund zero out the
AES Capital fund from the town side to
zero that Nets you a town budget now
that's year-over-year
negative um as Val mentioned when you
add in both components which is the
budget that was actually passed by Ram
plus the amount they're giving back to
the town that makes the the ram budget
negative year-over-year it's about a
$116,000 decrease the town budget with
that is a
$15,000 budget and the AES is uh a still
a
$381,000 increase that gives you a total
by taxation increase of about 2.9% which
is roughly what inflation is um but it
does we do still see a pretty big Mill
increase but that is in part because of
the change in formulation and the fact
that the grand list at this point is a
significant
decrease however the board of Selectmen
at their next meeting on the 10th will
be debating whether to the general
assembly passed a uh an emergency bill
that would allow the towns to incre
increase the basically the delay the
depreciation schedule for automobiles
which would have the effect of
increasing the grand list for
automobiles by at least
10% um don't know the exact number until
you actually crunch all the numbers um
with our actual range of cars um so it's
something that would have to go back to
qds and be
recalculated but as a ballpark you can
expect that to restore about $3 million
to the Grand list and if you do those
two things you take away you know at
least 1% of the mill rate increase for
the town so that's just a summary that's
their decision whether they want to do
that um per the Connecticut General
statutes um I'm assuming they will make
a decision to do that but I don't know
um and that's pretty much where we're at
right now so this is what that budget
looks like with those two things in it
as Val just said can you scroll down a
little more what were we at for this to
oh never mind it's right there okay Eric
just a really quick question the the The
Returned money from Ram is built into
this yes the return money from Ram is
built into this yes okay it's under the
hood somewhere I'm just assuming it's in
one of the
subtabs yeah it's it's so the way I've
always done it with ram is because what
they do is
they instead of giving the town a check
for
$150,000 let's say what they do is they
decrease the next year's monthly bill to
Andover so or so over the year they we
give that they give us that
$150,000 back build that straight into
the ram number uh right here right okay
so it's it's basically it's taking off
our Levy over time correct okay I got it
thanks Eric other towns show it a little
differently um I'm hoping in the because
this way we can keep track of where it
started what they did I think every year
that information will help us I was
going to email you this but I know
that's what happens you give us the
bottom line after they do the deductions
but I think it was marber I was just
looking at a whole bunch of different
towns and different things I think they
show the original ask then they show
what was refunded to the town it's just
easy to follow year toe I mean I know
I'm not going to ask you to do it now
but I'm
hoping maybe we can show that I've got
to kind of research it a little more
it's just very easy to read so we can
say okay this is what their first ask
was they reduced by they their audit was
1 million blah blah blah back
383 719 over they decided to keep their
2% and they're non-aps and they're
returning the rest to the towns it's
just very readable and it will help all
of us you know our Board of Finance
members will be rotating Through The
Years so they won't have the memory of
oh yeah we started here I just kind of
do you have any problem with showing it
that way instead of just doing all the
subtraction and then we see
it well I mean currently in the the
budget in Andover Ram shows up as a
single line item so I'm not sure what
you're I'm not sure how yeah I've go to
I've got to vocalize it better it just
was you know so just the other towns
maybe just added it in the next row you
know underneath it it's it just it's
more informational for us so that we
have kind of like what Rob asked you and
what I'm saying that I've seen the other
towns do is it almost like a note Joanne
just yeah yep like they'd have the where
his cursor is they'd have the total
underneath they've got like in
parentheses in red then an next then a
then a note saying returned from Surplus
right you know reduced further in Board
of Ed meeting you know because they also
reduced it by I thought I had notes on
that too Ram also maybe just some
comments off to the right like it's just
like the comments that that uh Eric
already put in all of our you know in
the budget right there's always a
comment that explains com was just
comments so like you say in future years
people can kind of see the
trends so because they they had the
Surplus and then they actually reduced
their operating and capital budget by um
57344 too you know so that was good you
know they reduced so their their
starting figure was up here and then
they went down and did a couple things
so it' be good to have those notes right
and then Eric my followup was which
meetings are you going to miss of ours
if you the next one the 12 okay just one
meeting
correct is that the ram meeting no
that's the one after no the the 12th is
the ram 12 is the ram
meeting was okay okay we won't have the
ram superintendent that's right the 19th
was supposed to be AES and then we moved
it
up so another good reason why we may
want to take action tonight just so that
we have the most updated spread sheet in
front of us know if Eric isn't around
isn't going to be available at the next
meeting um just a
thought somebody want to make a specific
motion to change the
budget I will I will move that we zero
out the contribution to the as capital
fund this year uh take it down from
100,000 to zero I'll second
[Music]
that
okay just try to get looking at I'm
looking at Excel so I'm just
try does anybody have uh or what further
discussion or
comments hearing none we can vote on
it I all those in favor say I hi I any
oppose any
extensions okay thank you that motion
passes so we'll zero that
out okay that being the case uh just so
everybody has it on the one drive that
you all have access to this budget as of
today is now uploaded to that file I
added one additional file uh a number of
years ago the uh Town's attorney was
asked for a legal opinion about what the
board of finances Authority was to
adjust the AES budget and I'm not
recommending that I'm just putting that
up there so that is your legal authority
of what you can and can't do and when um
if you have any questions about
that it go ahead I was just gonna ask
when you added it I was in the file
today I don't think I saw it or was it
is it in there I added it during the
meeting
okay I was going to say I've never seen
that document in
there correct thank
you so the other thing I would say is
that um I suspect that pending the
auditor's statement in a week or two um
they are right now just doing
the they're basically they they've got
their financial States statements
written they are just proofing by asking
us for a bunch of information about a
bunch of different they're just going
back and making sure that we're actually
doing things correctly at this point um
that given that we would have the
ability to
probably return instead of
190,000 because remember that was 15
,000 plus the 40 we over taxed the
residents last year we can probably bump
that number up to
300,000 um which would also provide a
significant decrease in the mill rate um
you know so I think the budget is
looking a lot more palatable to the
residents overall absolutely um you know
but we're not going to have that until
we get an actual out auditor report
which hopefully we'll have in a couple
of
weeks
super that's good news
yeah we are getting kind of tight on of
time but uh yeah yeah good to when is
the Rambo when is the ram vote like when
is our yeah I have a couple things that
I was trying to raise my hand to say I
don't know if anybody could see me on
the and Liz I was going to bring up I I
printed out our meeting dates and I was
just going to go over those too B good
no I appreciate having that other thing
up but um let me
so another question I don't I I really
appreciate knowing how much Surplus we
have that we can throw at the budget but
I want to publicly say that I really
want to have our meeting when we talk
about the budget tonight I know you know
in our thoughts you know we're all
gathering information right here because
whatever we end up passing is going to
to be you know I don't want to
artificially bring it down with the
surfplus I'm happy to throw more Surplus
at it afterwards but I'm hoping we have
some time to discuss it doesn't have to
be tonight um and so I know Eric was
getting to that point that maybe we'd do
that um the qu I had a couple questions
but let me get those meetings I just
want to make sure I I guess I'll do it
from memory we have the 12th where we
have Ram we have the 19th open yeah
and then I'm 19th be our regular meeting
no the 19th is the budget meeting
special meeting the 26th the following
week is the regular meeting is the
regular meeting after April second and
April budget
hearing okay April budget hearing so
that's the that's the official budget
hearing that we will entertain comments
from the from the public on the budget
anybody does that Mark the April 2nd
second right and then April second is
the budget I'm sorry budget hearing
that's the informational hearing where
we kind of present
it it's just it's an online yeah
generally the way that these roll if you
remember is that it's it's very similar
to a typical budget meeting and other
than you know except that
we generally have come to some you know
kind of narrowed in on some agreement on
what the budget will be but it's a last
opportunity for the public to have their
voices heard about the specific budget
where it is at that time um so we will
listen to any members of the public who
wish to speak give them an opportunity
provide their input in one last uh
meeting um and then typically after the
public has provided that input then we
would either vote to finalize the budget
um change the budget and then hopefully
we have to finalize it but we're going
to need to we're going to need to
finalize a budget either that meeting or
in a special
meeting very soon thereafter right
because the following the following week
is the town budget meeting in person
taking taking it to the high school gym
you know so okay generally speaking what
we've been able to do in the past is we
have our budget hearing we present it a
a handful of Town's people weigh in and
then we make a final call and then we we
kick it to town meeting yes so so 49 on
April 9th we will finalize the budget
we'll come back we really need to do it
on the second if at all possible because
we need to yeah we need to make sure
that there needs to go mailers need to
go out for the town budget yeah so right
the ninth is where we're literally going
to get with all the people in the jam
explain it to them and ask them to vote
to send it to referendum so that's the
special budget hearing is on the
9th budget hearings the budget hearing
is on the
secondary is the one on the n and the
meeting is the big one the meeting the
in-person meeting where we present the
budget to the town formally people can
make motions to change or reduce or
whatever the second is important it's
really a informational session and
feedback session not okay yeah anything
that's binding whereas on the ninth if
we get clearance you know we're going to
referend that's the big gotcha okay so
the people will come to the gym on the
n9th and they'll vote yay or nay and we
either go back or we go to referendum
that's right um number two April 2nd the
budget hearing will that also be in the
gym no it's generally just a virtual
meeting that's an open okay
yeah and just want get this all in my
calendar
yeah and the Reason by the way I asked
that question earlier about special
versus regular meetings is that the
regular meeting agendas are more uh
flexible so we have that 26 that last
meeting of the month we have the ability
to to screw around with our agenda in
ways that we can't with it's a special
meeting it's kind of locked in so that's
good to have that there right right so
the the formal rules are that if you are
holding a special meeting you have to
post the Agenda 24 hours in advance and
it cannot change after that okay the the
regular the the meetings that are posted
in
advance um the regular regularly
scheduled meetings you do have the
ability to change the agenda in the
meeting if you choose and if you
remember we have this additions or
changes the agenda so that allows us to
do that but that's because it's a it's a
pre-scheduled meeting you know people
have plenty of notice special meeting
you know prevent boards from kind of you
know hey we're going to meet Tuesday you
we'll keep it quiet we'll just CL it on
the board in the town hall and we're
just going to meet and run something
through and so it's just part of the
open you know transparency uh you know
laws intention to I it just so happens
that it's really good that we have that
meeting that's right before uh the
budget hearing um you know so we if we
do have some things come up that that
people haven't thought of we want to
change the we need to stick stuff in we
have that and I would say that if we can
our goal would be to come out of our
meeting on the 19th with a pretty good
idea that you know the board is the
board is comfortable with the numbers as
we have it so that after the public
hearing on the 2 at the end of that
whoever um provides input you know we
would we would just you know unless
there's something significant that would
come out of that which is you know the
purpose of the meeting to listen to the
input from the town um then we would
just almost be a formality to vote on
the budget we've already zero downa yeah
yep agree usually that's kind of where
we are sometimes it's a little we're
figuring out at the last minute yeah
Joanne so we have a few more meetings to
do some work is what we're saying you
know like I know this is great to have
Eric's not going to be at our next
meeting we will take a look at this
we've been talking to different people
but like I said I knew we had the 12th
the 19th March 26 being regular I had
written April and like we discussed we
had April 3rd as a potential budget
Workshop if we needed yeah but hopefully
I feel like we have had a lot of
meetings we're just so far ahead of the
schedule than what we usually are
usually we would have the town budget
meeting like this year it's going to be
April 9th and then when is the the ram
referendum that this whole Charter
change I know is it's May it's very
early in May May 6 okay is the town
write
ref and RAM ref both on the same date
yeah May 6 both of them correct you know
and it's I definitely know the thought
process behind why we did this because
there's going to be a full month in
between where people aren't really
unless they're hashing it out in the
papers but you know there's not usually
we're talking about it it's a hot button
topic and it's on everyone's mind you
say may closer to May because we're
still you know we're finishing up in
April this year we end on April 9th if
it goes to referendum it sits until May
so oh May 6 is Tuesday okay but you're
assuming you're gonna get through on the
first shot we really don't have a lot of
time Joan I mean no but we have several
more meetings to to we have three more
meetings gotta get there the 12th the
19th we have a regular meeting on the
26th don't we sometimes do things it's
really the 19th and the 26th where we're
going to need to wrap this all this up
because we have a presentation on the
12th that's going to eat I mean I'm
looking at my calendar right now it's
it's pretty tight yeah it is well it
always is and well the charter changes
the charter changes definitely sped
things up a little bit for us but it is
what it is and honestly I think we've
made some pretty good progress but I I
do think the 19th and the 26th could be
you know pretty major meetings where we
really have to grind through everything
yeah exactly yeah
B presentations are longer presentations
and now you know we'll get our time to
yeah talk about things as we like to
because the ram
presentation will you know we're going
to listen to it and it's pretty much
done and we'll see what happens yeah um
and then I I don't I don't want to I
have one more question that I have for
Eric y goe since he's here I don't know
if we're done discussing the other
um I just obviously we've done a lot of
talking and this is in a big overview of
the salaries and different things I just
you know when you sent us all the back
up so I could remember you said we'll
give you the the updated sheets and
everything looking at um and we don't
have to put up a spreadsheet I don't
want to say a name I just don't know how
with looking at the union documents and
the salary numbers that I see how we
started with the assist Treasurer salary
nothing personal where it is right now
it doesn't seem to fall in line when
we're all doing the addition and the
multiplication and figuring it out if
you want to discuss that discuss that in
executive
session yeah I I mean it can wait you're
here tonight and that's does anyone have
a problem with us going I mean we it's
just one question all of the other
things line up but that one doesn't line
up not trying
to you know we've we've talked about
well Joan I would say if you want to
talk about it and yeah we' make a motion
to go into executive session I make a
motion that we can discuss this in
executive session and we can invite the
town manager in with us please it's no
problem we just were trying to make
figures you know we were looking for the
information hey Liz second second any
discussion all those in favor say I
opposed any extensions no okay we'll
move into executive session so Eric's
going to put members of the public into
the waiting room we'll stop the
recording okay Eric just let us know
when you're ready y